.TH VNIM 1 "2026-06-20" "vnim dev" "Virtual Network Interface Manager Manual"
.SH NAME
vnim \- Virtual Network Interface Manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vnim
.I subcommand
.I target
[args...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vnim
is a professional Linux network orchestration tool for defining, spinning up, and managing complex virtual network topologies inside isolated network namespaces via simple YAML configs.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B up <lab.yaml>
Create and start the network topology defined in the YAML configuration. It creates namespaces, interfaces, routing, NAT, and provisions services and plugin hooks.
.TP
.B down <lab.yaml|plan_name>
Destroy the network topology. It stops all services and plugin hooks (executing custom cleanup scripts), removes interfaces and namespaces, and deletes state files.
.TP
.B validate <lab.yaml>
Validate the YAML configuration file against structural and network constraints.
.TP
.B dry-run <lab.yaml>
Show the sequence of shell commands (like ip netns, ip link, iptables) that would be executed to build the topology.
.TP
.B tree <lab.yaml>
Render a visual ASCII representation of the network topology hierarchy and associated services.
.TP
.B ps
List all active network topologies, their start times, YAML paths, and running services.
.TP
.B exec <namespace> <command> [args...]
Execute a command inside the context of a virtual network namespace.
.TP
.B shell <namespace>
Drop into an interactive shell inside a virtual network namespace.
.TP
.B version
Show version information.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
A configuration YAML consists of two root keys:
.I objects
and
.I services
.SS Objects
Defines virtual network interfaces, namespaces, and addresses. Supported types:
.B namespace, bridge, tap, tun, veth, vlan, vxlan, dummy, bond, address, route, nat.
.SS Services
Defines temporary infrastructure services. Supported types:
.B dhcp, dns, tftp, pxe, http, plugin.
.SH PLUGINS
Plugins allow running custom VM managers or container environments attached to interfaces.
.TP
.B mode
Either \fBsu-exec\fR (runs as root, default) or \fBexec\fR (runs as the original non-root user to preserve environment variables, GUI sessions, and access permissions).
.TP
.B script
Inline multi-line shell script to run when starting up the service. Automatically prepended with shebang if not present.
.TP
.B cleanup_script
Inline script to run when tearing down the service during \fBdown\fR.
.TP
.B path / args
Alternative to inline scripts; specifies path to an executable file and its arguments.
.SS Placeholders
All plugin command fields support Go-style dynamic templating:
.IP \(bu 2
.B {{.Interface}}
\- Target interface name.
.IP \(bu 2
.B {{.Namespace}}
\- Target interface network namespace.
.IP \(bu 2
.B {{.Mac}}
\- MAC address of the interface.
.IP \(bu 2
.B {{.IP}}
\- CIDR formatted IP address (e.g. 192.168.1.1/24).
.IP \(bu 2
.B {{.IPNoMask}}
\- IP address without subnet mask.
.IP \(bu 2
.B {{.PlanName}}
\- Name of the active topology plan.
.IP \(bu 2
.B {{.StateDir}}
\- Location of the plan's state database directory.
.IP \(bu 2
.B {{.Owner}}
\- Original non-root user running the command.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/run/vnim/plans/
Directory containing active plan states and plugin log/script outputs.
.SH AUTHOR
Created by tuhin-su.
.SH LICENSE
Distributed under the permissive MIT License.
